# I am woman reflection (continued)

Strong, cause, invincible: These are words that came up most frequently when I did a text analysis of the lyrics using Voyant Tools. From me, these words are highly evocative of the feelings that I found expressed in the interviews I collected for my union research. I associate strong with physical stamina, which I think was certainly part of the successful certification campaigns conducted by faculty, librarians, and support staff at the university. Certainly, individuals and groups had to be strong enough to engage in persuasive speech, to sit in public gathering signatures on union cards, and to hold on to their convictions when faced with opposition. Strong is also about being angry in that anger can provide an ongoing rush of energy that can be needed when engaged in struggles for social justice and collective mobilization.
Anger can be bright, but it can also be dark, and I think that song also captures the sorrow that can also fuel anger, both explicitly and implicitly. Those that fought for unionization, certainly grieved when they were not able to accomplish certain goals initially. Maternity leave was one dream that was not realized in 1975/76 and opposition from male colleagues led more than one female activist to tears.

Cause is almost an axiom for my/this research project. People engaged with and committed to unionization because they believed in “the cause.” Not necessarily the cause of the labour movement, because many of those who ultimately voted for the certification of the Carleton University Academic Staff Association (CUASA) and the Carleton University Support Staff Association (CUSSA) did not identify with the mainstream labour movement that fought for the rights of the working class. But they did believe in “the rule of law” and equity in the workplace, especially equal pay for the work of equal value. So, they had a cause and they needed to believe that they were invincible. Invincibility, which is linked to strength, reflects a deep belief in a cause and in oneself. “I can do anything at all” is a mantra for good and hard times, when one must believe that one can keep going and achieve one’s goals.

I too had to be strong and invincible to actually gain the rights to use the song. Initially, I made the mistake of assuming the Helen Reddy had the copyright on her creation. I found an email for one of her representatives online and sent several emails … with nothing coming back. Faced with the silence, I began to wonder if I needed to consider who (or what) else might hold the rights. This led me to a chat with a library colleague whose husband is a musician, then to one a representative for the Musicians Association of Ottawa-Gatineau and then, ultimately, to someone at Universal Music Group, the company that does hold the rights. For the final version of the film, we’ve (me and the Workers’ History Museum) have been able to purchase the right to use the song in perpetuity for the film and I think it’s money well spent. As we began to put together all the parts of the film, I could see the feelings and thoughts expressed through the song in the faces and words of the women we interviewed and the women whose images showed up in the archival photos we chose to tell the story.

In 1975, the United Nations chose this song as the anthem for the first International Women’s Year. And it makes sense. Ultimately, this is a song of hope and triumph and mirrors what Sylvia Gruda (CUSSA organizer) said towards the end of the interview she gave for the documentary: “I’m glad we did what we did. I’m proud of what we accomplished.” For many who lived through these times (at least those who were listening to Western pop music), this song expresses lyrically (in both the generic and Holbrook sense of the word) the feelings of those deeply involved in social change movements.

Why did I select this song? Really, I had no choice … this was one “truth” that I knew instantly. (And this truth was reinforced when, in a case of “archival kismet”, I found an ad for an upcoming Helen Reddy concert [September 1975]) in a back issue of The Charlatan (Carleton’s long-time student newspaper).[1]

Another “truth” for me is that writing lyrically or expressively, is something I feel wonderful doing. Since I finished my thesis in 2014, I have done other “academic” writing, which usually translates for me into not only following a particular form but also using a specific type of language—usually that which is theoretically informed. And yes, both form and language can be enormously helpful in terms of facilitating a relatively methodical and critical approach to my scholarship. But being able to use more conversational language, vernacular metaphors, even playing with language, always leads to a feeling of intense creativity and almost elation. When I am less constrained by the thought that I have to write (or think) in a certain way in order to be legitimate as a scholar, I inevitably hold back because I am prey to the thought that somehow my final product will not be good enough. Being liberated from this mindset, I feel more confident to explore and push the boundaries of my thinking.

I am planning to take a course in writing creative non-fiction this fall because I think that learning more about that genre of writing will help me become a better historian, a better teller of stories: strong and invincible.

[1] This pencil drawing is featured in the banner for this page in the portfolio along with the cirrus (word cloud) from my Voyant analysis.
